EXAMPLE_USAGE.md, before:

# Example Usage
This page includes an extended example usage guide for using the `explabox` on a dataset and black-box model for multi-class classification.

[![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/14lXvXV01DaSruSAhD1RLbILRl2mPQ4nS?usp=sharing)

## Demo: Drug Review Classification
Welcome to the demo of the [explabox](https://explabox.rtfd.io) on the [UCI Drug Reviews](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Drug+Review+Dataset+%28Drugs.com%29#) dataset. To speed up the demo, we made a smaller subset of the train and test dataset. The demo
also includes a pretrained black-box classifier, which aims to predict whether a `review` in the text got a `rating` of
`negative` (1-5), `neutral` (5-6) or `positive` (6-10).

**To start the demo, you require:**
- Python 3.8 or above (see the [Python installation guide](https://www.python.org/downloads/))
- Jupyter Notebook installed (see the [Jupyter installation guide](https://jupyter.org/install))
- An active internet connection

**Install the demo via:**
- `pip3 install explabox`
- `pip3 install explabox-demo-drugreview`

### Want to follow along?
We have prepared a [Jupyter Notebook](https://git.science.uu.nl/m.j.robeer/explabox-demo-drugreview/-/blob/main/explabox_demo_drugreview.ipynb) for you that runs all necessary lines for the demo.

> Having trouble? Want to know which functionalities the [explabox](https://explabox.rtfd.io) includes? Check out the API reference at [https://explabox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/explabox.html](https://explabox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/explabox.html).

### Let's get started!
The [Jupyter Notebook demo](https://git.science.uu.nl/m.j.robeer/explabox-demo-drugreview/-/blob/main/explabox_demo_drugreview.ipynb) will walk you through importing your data and model into the `explabox`, and go over some examples for the `explore`, `examine`, `expose` and `explain` parts. The demo is structured as follows:

1. **[Ingestibles](#ingestibles)**: importing your model and data.
2. **[Explore](#explore)**: exploring the dataset descriptives.
3. **[Examine](#examine)**: examine model behavior on the data.
4. **[Explain](#explain)**: explain how the model behaves in general (global) and for specific predictions (local).
5. **[Expose](#expose)**: find where your model is sensitive to, when it breaks down and when its behavior is unfair.
6. **[Challenges](#challenges)**: Challenges to further `explore`, `examine`, `expose` and `explain` your ingestibles and turn them into digestibles.

<a name='ingestibles'></a>
### 1. Ingestibles
The general idea of the `explabox` is to turn your `ingestibles` into `digestibles`. Your `ingestibles` (model and data) are typically opaque and difficult to understand. They require a lot of effort to trust and understand, to test, and communicate the results of these tests. We made that a lot simpler! We have several components that turn the `ingestibles` into `digestibles`: experiments that increase the transparency of your model, and are easy to understand and share.

To get started, the `explabox` requires a `model` (e.g. a Scikit-learn classifier or a deep neural network trained in PyTorch) and the `data` (e.g. CSV, HDF5, Huggingface datasets or a Pandas dataframe) you want to turn into `digestibles`. An example of a dataset for debugging purposes is the test set of the model. The `explabox` has two simple functions that import the data and model for you: `explabox.import_data(...)` and `explabox.import_model(...)`. For the demo, we have already provided you with the location of the dataset file (`dataset_file`) and imported the model for you (`model`):

```python
from explabox_demo_drugreview import model, dataset_file
```

The [UCI Drug Reviews](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Drug+Review+Dataset+%28Drugs.com%29#) dataset contains over 200,000 patient reviews for drugs. The dataset includes the following columns:

Column | Description | Data type
-------|-------------|--------
`drugName` | Name of drug discussed in review | Categorical (string)
`condition` | Name of condition discussed in review | Categorical (string)
`review` | Patient review | Free text (string)
`rating` | 10 star patient rating | Rating `1-10` (integer)
`date` | Date of review entry | Date
`usefulCount` | Number of users who found the review useful | Continuous value `>=0` (integer)

To speed up the demo, we have included a small subset of examples from the original `train` and `test` set. We made a classifier, that predicts the sentiment for each review: `negative` (1-5), `neutral` (5-6) or `positive` (6-10). To make the performance comparisons easier, the `rating` column in the example dataset has also been transformed to these three categorical values.

Let us start by importing the data, where we are interesting in the textual reviews in the `'review'` column and the labels in the `'rating'` column. The `dataset_file` is the location of the dataset (`drugsCom.zip`), containing a train split (`drugsComTrain.tsv`) and test split (`drugsComTest.tsv`).

```python
from explabox import import_data
data = import_data(dataset_file, data_cols='review', label_cols='rating')
```

The `model` included has already been passed through the `model = import_model(...)` function for you, and can therefore be used directly. This is on purpose, so the model is a true black-box for you!

> **Now let's explore/examine/expose/explain your model with the Explabox!**

Make sure you explicitly include that `drugsComTrain.tsv` includes the train split and `drugsComTest.tsv` the test split of the data:

```python
from explabox import Explabox

box = Explabox(data=data,
               model=model,
               splits={'train': 'drugsComTrain.tsv', 'test': 'drugsComTest.tsv'})
```

Now you are ready to `.explore`, `.examine`, `.expose` and `.explain` with the `explabox`!

```{admonition} NOTE
:class: info

You can use `help(...)` at any time to better understand a model or function.
```

<a name='explore'></a>
### 2. Explore
The *Explorer* explores your data by providing descriptive statistics. It is included in the Explabox under the `.explore` property.

Get descriptives for all splits by calling `box.explore()` or `box.explore.descriptives()`:

```python
box.explore()
```
![drugscom_explore](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_explore.png?raw=true)

Even though we trust you could have calculated each of these yourselves, it sure saves a lot of work. One simple call and that is all there is. Let's `examine` (see what I did there?) some more impressive functionalities.

<a name='examine'></a>
### 3. Examine
Now we've got a gist of what the data looks like, how does the model perform on the data? Simple, just call `box.examine()` or `box.examine.performance()`. To do so, the _Examiner_ requires a 'model' and 'data'. It is included in the `explabox` under the `.examine` property.

```python
box.examine(split='test')
```
![drugscom_examine_performance](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_examine_performance.png?raw=true)

_That's some magic!_

It sure is! The `explabox` inferred your model is a classifier, got all the dataset splits and did all the work for you. It even includes links to explain what all the metrics included mean! Some magic box, right?

The `explabox` even allows us to dive deeper into where the model went wrong. Let us see which examples were wrongly classified:

```python
box.examine.wrongly_classified()
```
![drugscom_examine](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_examine.png?raw=true)

<a name='explain'></a>
### 4. Explain
So what makes the `explabox` so unique? Why not use one of the many other tools for generating dataset descriptives and calculating performance?

Well, the `explabox` doesn't stop there! That's just where it starts. Ever heard of _explainable artificial intelligence_ (XAI)? We've included that for you!

It doesn't matter if you use the explanations for yourself, show your end-user why a decision was made, to test an externally acquired model, or to provide model clients and supervisory authorities with the insights they require. We can help you on all of those. The explanations included are either _local_ (providing explanations for a single prediction) or _global_ (providing explanations for one or more dataset splits).

The _Explainer_ creates explanations corresponding to a model and dataset (with ground-truth labels). The _Explainer_ requires ‘data’ and ‘model’ defined. It is included in the `explabox` under the `.explain` property.

#### 4.1 Local explanations
Why did my model predict a class label? Look no further than `box.explain.explain_prediction(...)`:

```python
box.explain.explain_prediction('Hate this medicine so much!')
```
![drugscom_explain](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_explain.png?raw=true)

_Even more magic!_

We've got the work covered for you. Even though it is very easy to use the defaults, you can incorporate your own requirements into the function call:
- Want more samples? `.explain_prediction(..., n_instances=500)`
- Unweighed samples? `.explain_prediction(..., weigh_samples=False)`
- Want other methods? `.explain_prediction(..., methods=['lime', 'shap', 'local_tree'])`

So many options to choose from! It uses [text_explainability](https://text-explainability.readthedocs.io/) for all these methods, which provides a generic architecture for constructing local/global explanation methods.

```{admonition} INFO
:class: info

Want to see all options for local explanation? Check out the [text_explainability documentation](https://text-explainability.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/text_explainability.local_explanation.html).
```

#### 4.2 Global explanations
A lot of model behavior can be explained through the data it trained on. So, are there specific tokens corresponding to each label in the training set?

```python
box.explain.token_frequency(splits='train', explain_model=False, labelwise=True)
```

We could have done the same for the `'test'` split, or explaining model predictions rather than ground-truth labels (`explain_model=True`) or aggregating them over all labels (`labelwise=False`). Want to know how informative tokens are in splitting labels? Try `box.explain.token_information(...)`.

The datasets include a lot of examples. Can we summarize them in fewer examples, let's say 5? That's what `box.explain.prototypes(...)` does:

```python
box.explain.prototypes(n=5, method='kmedoids')
```
![drugscom_explain_global](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_explain_global.png?raw=true)

Or maybe add some outliers (so-called _criticisms_), that are a-typical for the dataset split:

```python
box.explain.prototypes_criticisms(n_prototypes=5, n_criticisms=3)
```

```{admonition} INFO
:class: info

There are so many options for explanations, provided for text datasets by the [text_explainability](https://text-explainability.readthedocs.io/) package. Check it out to see what is possible!
```

<a name='expose'></a>
### 5. Expose
Last, but far from least, the _Exposer_ exposes your model and/or data, by performing sensitivity tests. With the _Exposer_ you can see model sensitivity to random inputs (_safety_), test model generalizability (_robustness_), and see the effect of adjustments of attributes in the inputs (e.g. swapping male pronouns for female pronouns; _fairness_), for the dataset as a whole (_global_) as well as for individual instances (_local_).

The _Exposer_ requires ‘data’ and ‘model’ defined. It is included in the `explabox` under the `.expose` property.

#### 5.1 Safety
Does your text classifier break down at some inputs? Strings it cannot parse? Instances that empty or are too long? Try exposing the input space to see its safety:

```python
box.expose.input_space('all', min_length=0, max_length=6000)
```

#### 5.2 Robustness
Or take a global approach by seeing what happens if you transform all instances in the 'test' split from their original form to uppercase:

```python
box.expose.compare_metric(perturbation='upper')
```

For both functions there are many techniques to choose from. Why not try exposing the input space with only `'ascii_upper'` and `'whitespace'`? Or try see how introducing `'add_typos'` affects your model?

```python
box.expose.compare_metric(perturbation='add_typos')
```
![drugscom_expose](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_expose.png?raw=true)


#### 5.2 Fairness & Robustness: pattern effects
Sometimes you need to go beyond the data to see model robustness and fairness. For the text domain, you can generate data with the [text_sensitivity](https://text-sensitivity.readthedocs.io/) package and see how the models performs on them.

To do so, you write so-called _patterns_ that generate data for you. At spots where you want some data filled in, you simply include curly braces and we fill in the data for you. For some entities (`name`, `city`, `email`, `year`, `month`, ...) we can even generate the data for you. Patterns with a pipe (`|`) simply put in the values you provided. Under the hood, it uses `from_pattern(...)` in the [text_sensitivity example usage](https://text-sensitivity.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example-usage.html) package. Example patterns include:

- Pattern `from_pattern('My phone number is {phone_number}')` generates _'My phone number is 001-364-187-2809', 'My phone number is +1-099-759-8699', ..._
- Pattern `from_pattern('{upper:name} is from {city}.)'` generates _'JAMES RUSSEL is from Oklahoma City.', 'BRIAN WILSON is from Millermouth.', ..._
- Pattern `from_pattern('{His|Her} favorite girl is {female_name}', female_name=RandomFirstName(sex='female'))` generates _'His favorite girl is Julia', 'Her favorite girl is Julia', ..._

Let's turn that generated data into a proper test, where we except that the review is `positive` regardless:

```python
box.expose.invariance('My friend {name} {loves|likes} this medicine. It is amazing!',
                      expectation='positive',
                      n=10)
```

Or one where it is `negative` regardless:

```python
box.expose.invariance('My friend {upper:first_name} {hates|dislikes} this medicine. It is{| not} terrible!',
                      expectation='negative',
                      n=2)
```

Or simply output the mean probabilistic score for the label `negative` for the generated instances:

```python
box.expose.mean_score('My friend {first_name} from {city} {hates|dislikes} this medicine!',
                      selected_labels='negative')
```

```{admonition} NOTE
:class: info

For the text domain, sensitivity tests are provided by the [text_sensitivity](https://text-sensitivity.readthedocs.io/) package. Try the [text_sensitivity example usage guide](https://text-sensitivity.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example-usage.html) to get acquainted with all that is possible.
```

<a name='challenges'></a>
### 6. Challenges
Want some pointers on where to go to next? Want to further `.explore`, `.examine`, `.expose` and `.explain` the black-box we provided? We've got some fun ideas to try out for yourself! Be sure to use the [API Reference](https://explabox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/explabox.html) to figure out how to do them.

**A. Which tokens are the most informative in distinguishing between the predicted classes?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try `help(box.explain.token_information)`
</details>

---

**B. Can I globally change the language to Dutch ('nl') if my data is Dutch?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    See `help(Explabox)`
</details>

---

**C. How do local explanations with LIME compare against scores with KernelSHAP?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try `box.explain.explain_prediction(..., methods=['lime', 'kernelshap'])`
</details>

---

**D. What happens if you change the `l1 regularization` of KernelSHAP?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try `box.explain.explain_prediction(..., methods=['kernelshap'], l1_reg=...)`
</details>

---

**E. How does the model perform if you repeat each sentence in the test set twice?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try `box.expose.compare_metrics(perturbation='repeat')`
</details>

---

**F. How does the model perform if you start each review with 'This is a review.'?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try
```python
from explabox.expose import OneToOnePerturbation
perturbation = OneToOnePerturbation(lambda x: f'This is a review. {x}')
box.expose.compare_metrics(perturbation=perturbation)
```
</details>

---

**G. Does adding random typos degrade model performance?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try
```python
from explabox.expose.text import OneToOnePerturbation
perturbation = OneToOnePerturbation(lambda x: f'{x}!!')
box.expose.compare_metrics(perturbation=perturbation)
```
</details>

---

**H. Are there any drug names (https://www.drugs.com/drug_information.html) that seem to have more positive scores?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try `box.expose.mean_score('{drug}', drug=['Acetaminophen', 'Adderral', ...], selected_labels='positive')`
</details>

---

Commit message:

Added test and usage for `box.explore.instances()`

EXAMPLE_USAGE.md, after:

# Example Usage
This page includes an extended example usage guide for using the `explabox` on a dataset and black-box model for multi-class classification.

[![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/14lXvXV01DaSruSAhD1RLbILRl2mPQ4nS?usp=sharing)

## Demo: Drug Review Classification
Welcome to the demo of the [explabox](https://explabox.rtfd.io) on the [UCI Drug Reviews](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Drug+Review+Dataset+%28Drugs.com%29#) dataset. To speed up the demo, we made a smaller subset of the train and test dataset. The demo
also includes a pretrained black-box classifier, which aims to predict whether a `review` in the text got a `rating` of
`negative` (1-5), `neutral` (5-6) or `positive` (6-10).

**To start the demo, you require:**
- Python 3.8 or above (see the [Python installation guide](https://www.python.org/downloads/))
- Jupyter Notebook installed (see the [Jupyter installation guide](https://jupyter.org/install))
- An active internet connection

**Install the demo via:**
- `pip3 install explabox`
- `pip3 install explabox-demo-drugreview`

### Want to follow along?
We have prepared a [Jupyter Notebook](https://git.science.uu.nl/m.j.robeer/explabox-demo-drugreview/-/blob/main/explabox_demo_drugreview.ipynb) for you that runs all necessary lines for the demo.

> Having trouble? Want to know which functionalities the [explabox](https://explabox.rtfd.io) includes? Check out the API reference at [https://explabox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/explabox.html](https://explabox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/explabox.html).

### Let's get started!
The [Jupyter Notebook demo](https://git.science.uu.nl/m.j.robeer/explabox-demo-drugreview/-/blob/main/explabox_demo_drugreview.ipynb) will walk you through importing your data and model into the `explabox`, and go over some examples for the `explore`, `examine`, `expose` and `explain` parts. The demo is structured as follows:

1. **[Ingestibles](#ingestibles)**: importing your model and data.
2. **[Explore](#explore)**: exploring the dataset descriptives.
3. **[Examine](#examine)**: examine model behavior on the data.
4. **[Explain](#explain)**: explain how the model behaves in general (global) and for specific predictions (local).
5. **[Expose](#expose)**: find where your model is sensitive to, when it breaks down and when its behavior is unfair.
6. **[Challenges](#challenges)**: Challenges to further `explore`, `examine`, `expose` and `explain` your ingestibles and turn them into digestibles.

<a name='ingestibles'></a>
### 1. Ingestibles
The general idea of the `explabox` is to turn your `ingestibles` into `digestibles`. Your `ingestibles` (model and data) are typically opaque and difficult to understand. They require a lot of effort to trust and understand, to test, and communicate the results of these tests. We made that a lot simpler! We have several components that turn the `ingestibles` into `digestibles`: experiments that increase the transparency of your model, and are easy to understand and share.

To get started, the `explabox` requires a `model` (e.g. a Scikit-learn classifier or a deep neural network trained in PyTorch) and the `data` (e.g. CSV, HDF5, Huggingface datasets or a Pandas dataframe) you want to turn into `digestibles`. An example of a dataset for debugging purposes is the test set of the model. The `explabox` has two simple functions that import the data and model for you: `explabox.import_data(...)` and `explabox.import_model(...)`. For the demo, we have already provided you with the location of the dataset file (`dataset_file`) and imported the model for you (`model`):

```python
from explabox_demo_drugreview import model, dataset_file
```

The [UCI Drug Reviews](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Drug+Review+Dataset+%28Drugs.com%29#) dataset contains over 200,000 patient reviews for drugs. The dataset includes the following columns:

Column | Description | Data type
-------|-------------|--------
`drugName` | Name of drug discussed in review | Categorical (string)
`condition` | Name of condition discussed in review | Categorical (string)
`review` | Patient review | Free text (string)
`rating` | 10 star patient rating | Rating `1-10` (integer)
`date` | Date of review entry | Date
`usefulCount` | Number of users who found the review useful | Continuous value `>=0` (integer)

To speed up the demo, we have included a small subset of examples from the original `train` and `test` set. We made a classifier, that predicts the sentiment for each review: `negative` (1-5), `neutral` (5-6) or `positive` (6-10). To make the performance comparisons easier, the `rating` column in the example dataset has also been transformed to these three categorical values.

Let us start by importing the data, where we are interesting in the textual reviews in the `'review'` column and the labels in the `'rating'` column. The `dataset_file` is the location of the dataset (`drugsCom.zip`), containing a train split (`drugsComTrain.tsv`) and test split (`drugsComTest.tsv`).

```python
from explabox import import_data
data = import_data(dataset_file, data_cols='review', label_cols='rating')
```

The `model` included has already been passed through the `model = import_model(...)` function for you, and can therefore be used directly. This is on purpose, so the model is a true black-box for you!

> **Now let's explore/examine/expose/explain your model with the Explabox!**

Make sure you explicitly include that `drugsComTrain.tsv` includes the train split and `drugsComTest.tsv` the test split of the data:

```python
from explabox import Explabox

box = Explabox(data=data,
               model=model,
               splits={'train': 'drugsComTrain.tsv', 'test': 'drugsComTest.tsv'})
```

Now you are ready to `.explore`, `.examine`, `.expose` and `.explain` with the `explabox`!

```{admonition} NOTE
:class: info

You can use `help(...)` at any time to better understand a model or function.
```

<a name='explore'></a>
### 2. Explore
The *Explorer* explores your data by providing descriptive statistics. It is included in the Explabox under the `.explore` property.

Get descriptives for all splits by calling `box.explore()` or `box.explore.descriptives()`:

```python
box.explore()
```
![drugscom_explore](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_explore.png?raw=true)

Even though we trust you could have calculated each of these yourselves, it sure saves a lot of work. One simple call and that is all there is.

Want to look at a split of the data in more detail? Try `box.explore.instances()`:

```python
dataset = box.explore.instances()
```

You can then further filter, drill-down or select you data. For instance by filtering on label 'positive'...

```python
dataset.filter('positive')
```

... or taking the first 10 elements

```python
dataset.head(n=10)
```

Let's `examine` (see what I did there?) for some more impressive functionalities.

<a name='examine'></a>
### 3. Examine
Now we've got a gist of what the data looks like, how does the model perform on the data? Simple, just call `box.examine()` or `box.examine.performance()`. To do so, the _Examiner_ requires a 'model' and 'data'. It is included in the `explabox` under the `.examine` property.

```python
box.examine(split='test')
```
![drugscom_examine_performance](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_examine_performance.png?raw=true)

_That's some magic!_

It sure is! The `explabox` inferred your model is a classifier, got all the dataset splits and did all the work for you. It even includes links to explain what all the metrics included mean! Some magic box, right?

The `explabox` even allows us to dive deeper into where the model went wrong. Let us see which examples were wrongly classified:

```python
box.examine.wrongly_classified()
```
![drugscom_examine](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_examine.png?raw=true)

<a name='explain'></a>
### 4. Explain
So what makes the `explabox` so unique? Why not use one of the many other tools for generating dataset descriptives and calculating performance?

Well, the `explabox` doesn't stop there! That's just where it starts. Ever heard of _explainable artificial intelligence_ (XAI)? We've included that for you!

It doesn't matter if you use the explanations for yourself, show your end-user why a decision was made, to test an externally acquired model, or to provide model clients and supervisory authorities with the insights they require. We can help you on all of those. The explanations included are either _local_ (providing explanations for a single prediction) or _global_ (providing explanations for one or more dataset splits).

The _Explainer_ creates explanations corresponding to a model and dataset (with ground-truth labels). The _Explainer_ requires ‘data’ and ‘model’ defined. It is included in the `explabox` under the `.explain` property.

#### 4.1 Local explanations
Why did my model predict a class label? Look no further than `box.explain.explain_prediction(...)`:

```python
box.explain.explain_prediction('Hate this medicine so much!')
```
![drugscom_explain](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_explain.png?raw=true)

_Even more magic!_

We've got the work covered for you. Even though it is very easy to use the defaults, you can incorporate your own requirements into the function call:
- Want more samples? `.explain_prediction(..., n_instances=500)`
- Unweighed samples? `.explain_prediction(..., weigh_samples=False)`
- Want other methods? `.explain_prediction(..., methods=['lime', 'shap', 'local_tree'])`

So many options to choose from! It uses [text_explainability](https://text-explainability.readthedocs.io/) for all these methods, which provides a generic architecture for constructing local/global explanation methods.

```{admonition} INFO
:class: info

Want to see all options for local explanation? Check out the [text_explainability documentation](https://text-explainability.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/text_explainability.local_explanation.html).
```

#### 4.2 Global explanations
A lot of model behavior can be explained through the data it trained on. So, are there specific tokens corresponding to each label in the training set?

```python
box.explain.token_frequency(splits='train', explain_model=False, labelwise=True)
```

We could have done the same for the `'test'` split, or explaining model predictions rather than ground-truth labels (`explain_model=True`) or aggregating them over all labels (`labelwise=False`). Want to know how informative tokens are in splitting labels? Try `box.explain.token_information(...)`.

The datasets include a lot of examples. Can we summarize them in fewer examples, let's say 5? That's what `box.explain.prototypes(...)` does:

```python
box.explain.prototypes(n=5, method='kmedoids')
```
![drugscom_explain_global](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_explain_global.png?raw=true)

Or maybe add some outliers (so-called _criticisms_), that are a-typical for the dataset split:

```python
box.explain.prototypes_criticisms(n_prototypes=5, n_criticisms=3)
```

```{admonition} INFO
:class: info

There are so many options for explanations, provided for text datasets by the [text_explainability](https://text-explainability.readthedocs.io/) package. Check it out to see what is possible!
```

<a name='expose'></a>
### 5. Expose
Last, but far from least, the _Exposer_ exposes your model and/or data, by performing sensitivity tests. With the _Exposer_ you can see model sensitivity to random inputs (_safety_), test model generalizability (_robustness_), and see the effect of adjustments of attributes in the inputs (e.g. swapping male pronouns for female pronouns; _fairness_), for the dataset as a whole (_global_) as well as for individual instances (_local_).

The _Exposer_ requires ‘data’ and ‘model’ defined. It is included in the `explabox` under the `.expose` property.

#### 5.1 Safety
Does your text classifier break down at some inputs? Strings it cannot parse? Instances that empty or are too long? Try exposing the input space to see its safety:

```python
box.expose.input_space('all', min_length=0, max_length=6000)
```

#### 5.2 Robustness
Or take a global approach by seeing what happens if you transform all instances in the 'test' split from their original form to uppercase:

```python
box.expose.compare_metric(perturbation='upper')
```

For both functions there are many techniques to choose from. Why not try exposing the input space with only `'ascii_upper'` and `'whitespace'`? Or try see how introducing `'add_typos'` affects your model?

```python
box.expose.compare_metric(perturbation='add_typos')
```
![drugscom_expose](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_expose.png?raw=true)


#### 5.2 Fairness & Robustness: pattern effects
Sometimes you need to go beyond the data to see model robustness and fairness. For the text domain, you can generate data with the [text_sensitivity](https://text-sensitivity.readthedocs.io/) package and see how the models performs on them.

To do so, you write so-called _patterns_ that generate data for you. At spots where you want some data filled in, you simply include curly braces and we fill in the data for you. For some entities (`name`, `city`, `email`, `year`, `month`, ...) we can even generate the data for you. Patterns with a pipe (`|`) simply put in the values you provided. Under the hood, it uses `from_pattern(...)` in the [text_sensitivity example usage](https://text-sensitivity.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example-usage.html) package. Example patterns include:

- Pattern `from_pattern('My phone number is {phone_number}')` generates _'My phone number is 001-364-187-2809', 'My phone number is +1-099-759-8699', ..._
- Pattern `from_pattern('{upper:name} is from {city}.)'` generates _'JAMES RUSSEL is from Oklahoma City.', 'BRIAN WILSON is from Millermouth.', ..._
- Pattern `from_pattern('{His|Her} favorite girl is {female_name}', female_name=RandomFirstName(sex='female'))` generates _'His favorite girl is Julia', 'Her favorite girl is Julia', ..._

Let's turn that generated data into a proper test, where we except that the review is `positive` regardless:

```python
box.expose.invariance('My friend {name} {loves|likes} this medicine. It is amazing!',
                      expectation='positive',
                      n=10)
```

Or one where it is `negative` regardless:

```python
box.expose.invariance('My friend {upper:first_name} {hates|dislikes} this medicine. It is{| not} terrible!',
                      expectation='negative',
                      n=2)
```

Or simply output the mean probabilistic score for the label `negative` for the generated instances:

```python
box.expose.mean_score('My friend {first_name} from {city} {hates|dislikes} this medicine!',
                      selected_labels='negative')
```

```{admonition} NOTE
:class: info

For the text domain, sensitivity tests are provided by the [text_sensitivity](https://text-sensitivity.readthedocs.io/) package. Try the [text_sensitivity example usage guide](https://text-sensitivity.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example-usage.html) to get acquainted with all that is possible.
```

<a name='challenges'></a>
### 6. Challenges
Want some pointers on where to go to next? Want to further `.explore`, `.examine`, `.expose` and `.explain` the black-box we provided? We've got some fun ideas to try out for yourself! Be sure to use the [API Reference](https://explabox.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/explabox.html) to figure out how to do them.

**A. Which tokens are the most informative in distinguishing between the predicted classes?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try `help(box.explain.token_information)`
</details>

---

**B. Can I globally change the language to Dutch ('nl') if my data is Dutch?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    See `help(Explabox)`
</details>

---

**C. How do local explanations with LIME compare against scores with KernelSHAP?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try `box.explain.explain_prediction(..., methods=['lime', 'kernelshap'])`
</details>

---

**D. What happens if you change the `l1 regularization` of KernelSHAP?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try `box.explain.explain_prediction(..., methods=['kernelshap'], l1_reg=...)`
</details>

---

**E. How does the model perform if you repeat each sentence in the test set twice?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try `box.expose.compare_metrics(perturbation='repeat')`
</details>

---

**F. How does the model perform if you start each review with 'This is a review.'?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try
```python
from explabox.expose import OneToOnePerturbation
perturbation = OneToOnePerturbation(lambda x: f'This is a review. {x}')
box.expose.compare_metrics(perturbation=perturbation)
```
</details>

---

**G. Does adding random typos degrade model performance?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try
```python
from explabox.expose.text import OneToOnePerturbation
perturbation = OneToOnePerturbation(lambda x: f'{x}!!')
box.expose.compare_metrics(perturbation=perturbation)
```
</details>

---

**H. Are there any drug names (https://www.drugs.com/drug_information.html) that seem to have more positive scores?**
<details>
    <summary>Show hints</summary>
    Try `box.expose.mean_score('{drug}', drug=['Acetaminophen', 'Adderral', ...], selected_labels='positive')`
</details>

---
