docs/source/index.rst, before:

.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/explabox.png?raw=true
   :alt: Explabox logo
   :align: center


{ ``Explore`` | ``Examine`` | ``Expose`` | ``Explain`` } your model with the *explabox*!
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/explabox
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/explabox/

.. image:: https://pepy.tech/badge/explabox
   :target: https://pepy.tech/project/explabox

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.8%20%7C%203.9%20%7C%203.10%20%7C%203.11%20%7C%203.12-blue
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/explabox/

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/explabox
   :target: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.en.html

.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/actions/workflows/check.yml/badge.svg
   :target: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/actions/workflows/check.yml

.. image:: https://codecov.io/gh/MarcelRobeer/explabox/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=7XVEUE5PDM
   :target: https://codecov.io/gh/MarcelRobeer/explabox

Developed to meet the practical machine learning (ML) auditing requirements of the Netherlands National Police, ``explabox`` is an open-source Python toolkit for the complete ML auditing lifecycle. It implements a standardized four-step workflow—``Explore``, ``Examine``, ``Explain``, and ``Expose``—to produce reproducible and holistic evaluations of text-based models.

The framework turns opaque models and data (**ingestibles**) into interpretable reports and visualizations (**digestibles**) tailored for diverse stakeholders, from developers and auditors to legal and ethical oversight bodies. It aids in explaining, testing and documenting AI/ML models, developed in-house or acquired externally.

.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/ingestibles-to-digestibles.png?raw=true
   :alt: Ingestibles to digestibles
   :align: center

``explabox`` operationalizes the audit process through its standardized four-step workflow:

- **Explore**\ : describe aspects of the model and data.
- **Examine**\ : calculate quantitative metrics on how the model performs.
- **Expose**\ : see model sensitivity to random inputs (\ *safety*\ ), test model generalizability (\e.g. sensitivity to typos; *robustness*\ ), and see the effect of adjustments of attributes in the inputs (e.g. swapping male pronouns for female pronouns; *fairness*\ ), for the dataset as a whole (\ *global*\ ) as well as for individual instances (\ *local*\ ).
- **Explain**\ : use XAI methods for explaining the whole dataset (\ *global*\ ), model behavior on the dataset (\ *global*\ ), and specific predictions/decisions (\ *local*\ ).

A number of analyses in the ``explabox`` can also be used to provide transparency and explanations to stakeholders, such as end-users or clients.

.. note::
    The ``explabox`` currently only supports natural language text as a modality. In the future, we intend to extend to other modalities.


Quick tour
----------

The ``explabox`` is distributed on `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/explabox/>`_. To use the package with Python, install it (\ ``pip install explabox``\ ), import your ``data`` and ``model`` and wrap them in the ``Explabox``. The example dataset and model shown here can be easily imported using demo package ``explabox-demo-drugreview``.

.. note::
   To easily follow along without a need for installation, run the Notebook in |googlecolab|

First\ , import the pre-provided ``model``, and import the ``data`` from the ``dataset_file``. All we need to know is in which column(s) your data is\ , and where we can find the corresponding labels\ :

.. code-block:: python

   from explabox import import_data, import_model
   data = import_data('./drugsCom.zip', data_cols='review', label_cols='rating')
   model = import_model('model.onnx', label_map={0: 'negative', 1: 'neutral', 2: 'positive'})

Second\ , we provide the data and model to the Explabox\ , and it does the rest! Rename the splits from your file names for easy access:

.. code-block:: python

   from explabox import Explabox
   box = Explabox(data=data,
                  model=model,
                  splits={'train': 'drugsComTrain.tsv', 'test': 'drugsComTest.tsv'})

Then ``.explore``\ , ``.examine``\ , ``.expose`` and ``.explain`` your model:

.. code-block:: python

   # Explore the descriptive statistics for each split
   box.explore()


.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_explore.png?raw=true
   :alt: drugscom_explore


.. code-block:: python

   # Show wrongly classified instances
   box.examine.wrongly_classified()


.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_examine.png?raw=true
   :alt: drugscom_examine


.. code-block:: python

   # Compare the performance on the test split before and after adding typos to the text
   box.expose.compare_metric(split='test', perturbation='add_typos')


.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_expose.png?raw=true
   :alt: drugscom_expose


.. code-block:: python

   # Get a local explanation (uses LIME by default)
   box.explain.explain_prediction('Hate this medicine so much!')


.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_explain.png?raw=true
   :alt: drugscom_explain


Using explabox
--------------
:doc:`installation`
    Installation guide, directly installing it via `pip`_ or through the `git`_.

.. |googlecolab| image:: https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg
      :target: https://colab.research.google.com/drive/14lXvXV01DaSruSAhD1RLbILRl2mPQ4nS?usp=sharing
      :alt: Open in Colab

:doc:`example-usage`
    An extended usage example, showcasing how you can *explore*, *examine*, *expose* and *explain* your AI model. |googlecolab|

:doc:`overview`
   Overview of the general idea behind the `explabox` and its package structure.

:doc:`Explabox API reference <api/explabox>`
    A reference to all classes and functions included in the `explabox`.

Development
-----------
`Explabox @ GIT`_
    The `git`_ includes the open-source code and the most recent development version.

:doc:`changelog`
    Changes for each version are recorded in the changelog.

:doc:`contributing`
    A guide to making your own contributions to the open-source *explabox* package.

Citation
--------

If you use the ``explabox`` in your work, please read the corresponding paper at `doi:10.48550/arXiv.2411.15257 <https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2411.15257>`__, and cite the paper as follows:

.. code:: bibtex

   @article{Robeer2025,
     title = {{Explabox: A Python Toolkit for Standardized Auditing and Explanation of Text Models}},
     author = {Robeer,  Marcel and Bron,  Michiel and Herrewijnen,  Elize and Hoeseni,  Riwish and Bex,  Floris},
     journal = {Journal of Open Source Software},
     year = {2025},
   }


.. _pip: https://pypi.org/project/explabox/
.. _git: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox
.. _`Explabox @ GIT`: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Using explabox
   :hidden:

   Home <self>
   installation.md
   example-usage.md

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 4
   :caption: API reference
   :hidden:

   overview.md
   api/explabox.rst

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Development
   :hidden:

   changelog.md
   contributing.md

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`

Commit message:

:alarm_clock: JOSS Paper published

docs/source/index.rst, after:

.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/explabox.png?raw=true
   :alt: Explabox logo
   :align: center


{ ``Explore`` | ``Examine`` | ``Expose`` | ``Explain`` } your model with the *explabox*!
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. image:: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/joss.08253/status.svg
   :target: https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.08253

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/explabox
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/explabox/

.. image:: https://pepy.tech/badge/explabox
   :target: https://pepy.tech/project/explabox

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.8%20%7C%203.9%20%7C%203.10%20%7C%203.11%20%7C%203.12-blue
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/explabox/

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/explabox
   :target: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-3.0.en.html

.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/actions/workflows/check.yml/badge.svg
   :target: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/actions/workflows/check.yml

.. image:: https://codecov.io/gh/MarcelRobeer/explabox/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=7XVEUE5PDM
   :target: https://codecov.io/gh/MarcelRobeer/explabox

Developed to meet the practical machine learning (ML) auditing requirements of the Netherlands National Police, ``explabox`` is an open-source Python toolkit for the complete ML auditing lifecycle. It implements a standardized four-step workflow—``Explore``, ``Examine``, ``Explain``, and ``Expose``—to produce reproducible and holistic evaluations of text-based models.

The framework turns opaque models and data (**ingestibles**) into interpretable reports and visualizations (**digestibles**) tailored for diverse stakeholders, from developers and auditors to legal and ethical oversight bodies. It aids in explaining, testing and documenting AI/ML models, developed in-house or acquired externally.

.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/ingestibles-to-digestibles.png?raw=true
   :alt: Ingestibles to digestibles
   :align: center

``explabox`` operationalizes the audit process through its standardized four-step workflow:

- **Explore**\ : describe aspects of the model and data.
- **Examine**\ : calculate quantitative metrics on how the model performs.
- **Expose**\ : see model sensitivity to random inputs (\ *safety*\ ), test model generalizability (\e.g. sensitivity to typos; *robustness*\ ), and see the effect of adjustments of attributes in the inputs (e.g. swapping male pronouns for female pronouns; *fairness*\ ), for the dataset as a whole (\ *global*\ ) as well as for individual instances (\ *local*\ ).
- **Explain**\ : use XAI methods for explaining the whole dataset (\ *global*\ ), model behavior on the dataset (\ *global*\ ), and specific predictions/decisions (\ *local*\ ).

A number of analyses in the ``explabox`` can also be used to provide transparency and explanations to stakeholders, such as end-users or clients.

.. note::
   The ``explabox`` currently only supports natural language text as a modality. In the future, we intend to extend to other modalities.

.. important::
   The corresponding paper for the `explabox` can be accessed online at `doi:10.21105/joss.08253 <https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.08253>`_.

Quick tour
----------

The ``explabox`` is distributed on `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/explabox/>`_. To use the package with Python, install it (\ ``pip install explabox``\ ), import your ``data`` and ``model`` and wrap them in the ``Explabox``. The example dataset and model shown here can be easily imported using demo package ``explabox-demo-drugreview``.

.. note::
   To easily follow along without a need for installation, run the Notebook in |googlecolab|

First\ , import the pre-provided ``model``, and import the ``data`` from the ``dataset_file``. All we need to know is in which column(s) your data is\ , and where we can find the corresponding labels\ :

.. code-block:: python

   from explabox import import_data, import_model
   data = import_data('./drugsCom.zip', data_cols='review', label_cols='rating')
   model = import_model('model.onnx', label_map={0: 'negative', 1: 'neutral', 2: 'positive'})

Second\ , we provide the data and model to the Explabox\ , and it does the rest! Rename the splits from your file names for easy access:

.. code-block:: python

   from explabox import Explabox
   box = Explabox(data=data,
                  model=model,
                  splits={'train': 'drugsComTrain.tsv', 'test': 'drugsComTest.tsv'})

Then ``.explore``\ , ``.examine``\ , ``.expose`` and ``.explain`` your model:

.. code-block:: python

   # Explore the descriptive statistics for each split
   box.explore()


.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_explore.png?raw=true
   :alt: drugscom_explore


.. code-block:: python

   # Show wrongly classified instances
   box.examine.wrongly_classified()


.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_examine.png?raw=true
   :alt: drugscom_examine


.. code-block:: python

   # Compare the performance on the test split before and after adding typos to the text
   box.expose.compare_metric(split='test', perturbation='add_typos')


.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_expose.png?raw=true
   :alt: drugscom_expose


.. code-block:: python

   # Get a local explanation (uses LIME by default)
   box.explain.explain_prediction('Hate this medicine so much!')


.. image:: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/example/drugscom_explain.png?raw=true
   :alt: drugscom_explain


Using explabox
--------------
:doc:`installation`
    Installation guide, directly installing it via `pip`_ or through the `git`_.

.. |googlecolab| image:: https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg
      :target: https://colab.research.google.com/drive/14lXvXV01DaSruSAhD1RLbILRl2mPQ4nS?usp=sharing
      :alt: Open in Colab

:doc:`example-usage`
    An extended usage example, showcasing how you can *explore*, *examine*, *expose* and *explain* your AI model. |googlecolab|

:doc:`overview`
   Overview of the general idea behind the `explabox` and its package structure.

:doc:`Explabox API reference <api/explabox>`
    A reference to all classes and functions included in the `explabox`.

Development
-----------
`Explabox @ GIT`_
    The `git`_ includes the open-source code and the most recent development version.

:doc:`changelog`
    Changes for each version are recorded in the changelog.

:doc:`contributing`
    A guide to making your own contributions to the open-source *explabox* package.

Citation
--------

If you use the ``explabox`` in your work, please read the corresponding paper at `doi:10.21105/joss.08253 <https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.08253>`__, and cite the paper as follows:

.. code:: bibtex

   @article{Robeer2025,
     title = {{Explabox: A Python Toolkit for Standardized Auditing and Explanation of Text Models}},
     author = {Robeer, Marcel and Bron, Michiel and Herrewijnen, Elize and Hoeseni, Riwish and Bex, Floris},
     doi = {10.21105/joss.08253},
     journal = {Journal of Open Source Software},
     year = {2025},
     volume = {10},
     number = {114},
     pages = {8253},
   }


.. _pip: https://pypi.org/project/explabox/
.. _git: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox
.. _`Explabox @ GIT`: https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Using explabox
   :hidden:

   Home <self>
   installation.md
   example-usage.md

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 4
   :caption: API reference
   :hidden:

   overview.md
   api/explabox.rst

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Development
   :hidden:

   changelog.md
   contributing.md

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
