docs/source/overview.md, before:

# Overview
The Explabox aims to provide insights into your data and model behavior, by transforming _ingestibles_ into _digestibles_ through four types of _analyses_. The Explabox is split into three layers:

![layers](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/layers.png?raw=true)

## Ingestibles
Ingestibles encompass your `model` and `data`. The `Ingestible` class provides a unified interface for accessing your `model` (e.g. its meta-information and prediction function) and your `data` (e.g. the instances, the various splits, and corresponding ground-truth labels). Ingestibles contain meta-information of the data and model (to determine relevant functions for analyses and for auditability) and allow for optimized inferencing through batching and lazy loading.

### Importing ingestibles
The `model` can be imported via the `import_model()` function, while the `data` is imported via the `import_data()` function.

Supported `models` are:

- _Scikit-learn_
- ONNX (supports _TensorFlow_, _PyTorch_, _HuggingFace_, _Scikit-Learn_, ...)
- Python callables

Supported `data` are:

- _NumPy_ arrays
- _Pandas_ DataFrames
- _HuggingFace_ datasets
- Files (online or offline):
    - Tabular dataset files (`.csv`, `.tsv`, `.json`, `.txt`, `.xls`, `.xlsx`, ...)
    - Folders or archived files (`.zip`, `.rar`, `.gzip`, ...) containing multiple dataset files
    - Pickled Python objects (`.pkl`)
    - _HDF5_ files

## Analyses: turning ingestibles into digestibles
Once imported, these ingestibles can be made more informative by turning them into digestibles. Each analysis provides functions to enhance the transparency of the model and/or data:

| Analysis | Class | Description | Requires |
|------------|-------|-------------|----------|
| `explore` | `Explorer` | The Explorer explores your data by providing descriptive statistics. | _data_ |
| `examine` | `Examiner` | The Examiner calculates quantitative metrics on how the model performs. | _data_, _model_ |
| `explain` | `Explainer` | The Explainer creates explanations corresponding to a model and dataset (with ground-truth labels). | _data_, _model_ |
| `expose` | `Exposer` | The Exposer exposes your model and/or data, by performing sensitivity tests. | _data_, _model_ |

The `Explabox` class is a unified interface for all of these classes, where an instance of each of these classes is 
constructed. These can be accessed via `.explore`, `.examine`, `.explain` and `.expose`, respectively.

For example, using the `Examiner` one can obtain (for a classification task) all instances wrongly classified by the model, which returns the `WronglyClassified` digestible:

```python
>>> from explabox.examine import Examiner
>>> Examiner(ingestibles=ingestible).wrongly_classified()
```

## Digestibles
Digestibles are the return type after performing an analysis. The information contained in them can be accessed in various ways (i.e. _interactively_ or _statically_), depending on stakeholders needs. Example methods of access include:

- Python object (i.e. the raw property values)
- Object descriptions:
    - `JSON`
    - `YAML`
    - Python dictionary
- User interfaces (using plots rendered with `plotly`):
    - HTML
    - Jupyter Notebook

When using an interactive Python shell, the Explabox will default to the Jupyter Notebook interface. In a non-interactive Python shell the Python object is the basis for the digestible. For online applications (e.g. `streamlit`) the HTML interface can be used.

Commit message:

:alarm_clock: JOSS Paper published

docs/source/overview.md, after:

# Overview
The Explabox aims to provide insights into your data and model behavior, by transforming _ingestibles_ into _digestibles_ through four types of _analyses_. The Explabox is split into three layers:

![layers](https://github.com/MarcelRobeer/explabox/blob/main/img/layers.png?raw=true)

> A full explanation of the functionalities is included in the Journal of Open-Source Software (JOSS) paper: [![DOI](https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/joss.08253/status.svg)](https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.08253)

## Ingestibles
Ingestibles encompass your `model` and `data`. The `Ingestible` class provides a unified interface for accessing your `model` (e.g. its meta-information and prediction function) and your `data` (e.g. the instances, the various splits, and corresponding ground-truth labels). Ingestibles contain meta-information of the data and model (to determine relevant functions for analyses and for auditability) and allow for optimized inferencing through batching and lazy loading.

### Importing ingestibles
The `model` can be imported via the `import_model()` function, while the `data` is imported via the `import_data()` function.

Supported `models` are:

- _Scikit-learn_
- ONNX (supports _TensorFlow_, _PyTorch_, _HuggingFace_, _Scikit-Learn_, ...)
- Python callables

Supported `data` are:

- _NumPy_ arrays
- _Pandas_ DataFrames
- _HuggingFace_ datasets
- Files (online or offline):
    - Tabular dataset files (`.csv`, `.tsv`, `.json`, `.txt`, `.xls`, `.xlsx`, ...)
    - Folders or archived files (`.zip`, `.rar`, `.gzip`, ...) containing multiple dataset files
    - Pickled Python objects (`.pkl`)
    - _HDF5_ files

## Analyses: turning ingestibles into digestibles
Once imported, these ingestibles can be made more informative by turning them into digestibles. Each analysis provides functions to enhance the transparency of the model and/or data:

| Analysis | Class | Description | Requires |
|------------|-------|-------------|----------|
| `explore` | `Explorer` | The Explorer explores your data by providing descriptive statistics. | _data_ |
| `examine` | `Examiner` | The Examiner calculates quantitative metrics on how the model performs. | _data_, _model_ |
| `explain` | `Explainer` | The Explainer creates explanations corresponding to a model and dataset (with ground-truth labels). | _data_, _model_ |
| `expose` | `Exposer` | The Exposer exposes your model and/or data, by performing sensitivity tests. | _data_, _model_ |

The `Explabox` class is a unified interface for all of these classes, where an instance of each of these classes is 
constructed. These can be accessed via `.explore`, `.examine`, `.explain` and `.expose`, respectively.

For example, using the `Examiner` one can obtain (for a classification task) all instances wrongly classified by the model, which returns the `WronglyClassified` digestible:

```python
>>> from explabox.examine import Examiner
>>> Examiner(ingestibles=ingestible).wrongly_classified()
```

## Digestibles
Digestibles are the return type after performing an analysis. The information contained in them can be accessed in various ways (i.e. _interactively_ or _statically_), depending on stakeholders needs. Example methods of access include:

- Python object (i.e. the raw property values)
- Object descriptions:
    - `JSON`
    - `YAML`
    - Python dictionary
- User interfaces (using plots rendered with `plotly`):
    - HTML
    - Jupyter Notebook

When using an interactive Python shell, the Explabox will default to the Jupyter Notebook interface. In a non-interactive Python shell the Python object is the basis for the digestible. For online applications (e.g. `streamlit`) the HTML interface can be used.
